feat: rln relay 2023 update (#132)
vacp2p/vac.dev: rlog/2023-10-10-rln-relay.mdx

---
title: 'Using RLN in an anonymous p2p network'
date: 2023-10-10 12:00:00
authors: p1ge0nh8er
published: true
slug: rln-anonymous-p2p-network
categories: research

toc_min_heading_level: 2
toc_max_heading_level: 4
---

Rate Limiting Nullifiers in practice, applied to an anonymous p2p network, like Waku.

<!--truncate-->

## Introduction

Rate Limiting Nullifier (RLN) is a zero-knowledge gadget that allows users to prove 2 pieces of information,
1. They belong to a permissioned membership set
2. Their rate of signaling abides by a fixed number that has been previously declared

The first piece of information is proved with the use of a [Merkle Inclusion Proof](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/tutorials/merkle-proofs-for-offline-data-integrity/)

The second piece of information is proved with a simple range check, along with a mechanism that can be used to interpolate the secret of a user that offends this "rate limit"

Note: This rlog describes rln-v1, which excludes the range check in favor of a global rate limit for all users, which is once per time window. This version is currently in use in waku-rln-relay.

## RLN Protocol parameters

> 1. Proving System: `groth16`

Author: addressed in d12999f

---

> title: 'Using RLN in an anonymous p2p network'

Author: @kaiserd how does this sound - "Strengthening anonymous DoS Prevention with Rate Limiting Nullifiers in Waku"

which is then inserted into the tree at the next available index.
Upon which, Users can prove their knowledge of the pre-image of a leaf in the tree, 
also called a commitment.
They can do so by generating a [Merkle Inclusion Proof](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/tutorials/merkle-proofs-for-offline-data-integrity/).

The circuit ensures that the User's secret does indeed hash to a leaf in the tree,
and that the provided merkle proof is valid.

After a User generates this zk-proof, 
they can transmit it to other users, 
who can verify the proof.
Since the message's hash is included within the proof generation, 
we also guarantee integrity of the message by this mechanism.

When a User does behave maliciously, 
they generate multiple proofs per epoch.
When multiple proofs are generated per epoch, 
this exposes the malicious User's secret, further described in [Malicious User secret interpolation mechanism](#malicious-user-secret-interpolation-mechanism)

Note: This blog post describes rln-v1, which excludes the range check in favor of a global rate limit for all users, which is once per time window. This version is currently in use in waku-rln-relay.

## RLN Protocol parameters

> 

Author: does this work?
e6f77e1

Note: This blog post describes rln-v1, which excludes the range check in favor of a global rate limit for all users,
which is once per time window. This version is currently in use in waku-rln-relay.

## RLN Protocol parameters

Given below is the set of cryptographic primitives, 
and constants that are used in the RLN protocol. 

1. Proving System: [`groth16`](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/260.pdf)
2. Elliptic Curve: [`bn254`](https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/879.pdf) (aka bn128) (not to be confused with the 254 bit Weierstrass curve)
3. Default Merkle Tree Height: `20`
4. Hashing algorithm: [`Poseidon`](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/458.pdf)
5. Merkle Tree: [`Sparse Indexed Merkle Tree`](https://github.com/rate-limiting-nullifier/pmtree)
6. Messages per epoch: `1`
7. Epoch duration: `10 seconds`

## Malicious User secret interpolation mechanism

Following are the private inputs to the circuit -
```
identitySecret: the randomly generated secret of the user
identityPathIndex: the index of the commitment derived from the secret
pathElements: elements included in the path to the index of the commitment
```

Following are the public inputs to the circuit -
```

> x: hash of the signal to the finite field

Author: Agreed - I'll mention it in the protocol parameters

> x: hash of the signal to the finite field

Author: Addressed in 6ff7088

> rlnIdentifier: application-specific identifier which this proof is being generated for

Author: Addressed in 6ff7088

This mechanism is further described in [malicious User secret interpolation mechanism](#malicious-user-secret-interpolation-mechanism)

Note: This blog post describes rln-v1, which excludes the range check in favor of a global rate limit for all users,
which is once per time window. This version is currently in use in waku-rln-relay.

## RLN Protocol parameters

Given below is the set of cryptographic primitives, 
and constants that are used in the RLN protocol. 

1. Proving System: [`groth16`](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/260.pdf)
2. Elliptic Curve: [`bn254`](https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/879.pdf) (aka bn128) (not to be confused with the 254 bit Weierstrass curve)
3. Finite Field: Prime-order subgroup of the group of points on the `bn254` curve
4. Default Merkle Tree Height: `20`
5. Hashing algorithm: [`Poseidon`](https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/458.pdf)
6. Merkle Tree: [`Sparse Indexed Merkle Tree`](https://github.com/rate-limiting-nullifier/pmtree)
7. Messages per epoch: `1`
8. Epoch duration: `10 seconds`

## Malicious User secret interpolation mechanism

> note: all the parameters mentioned below are elements in the finite field mentioned above.

> Following are the private inputs to the circuit -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The private inputs to the circuit are as follows: -
```

```
identitySecret: the randomly generated secret of the user
identityPathIndex: the index of the commitment derived from the secret
pathElements: elements included in the path to the index of the commitment
```

Following are the public inputs to the circuit -
```
x: hash of the signal to the finite field
rlnIdentifier: application-specific identifier which this proof is being generated for
epoch: the timestamp which this proof is being generated for
```

> Following are the outputs from the circuit -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The outputs of the circuit are as follows: -
```

[Waku-RLN-Relay](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/17/) is a [libp2p](https://libp2p.io) pubsub validator that verifies if a given message, attached with a proof is valid, and then relays it.

## Performance analysis

> Test bench specs: AMD EPYC 7502P 32-Core, 4x32GB DDR4 Reg.ECC Memory 

This simulation was conducted by @alrevuelta, and is described in more detail [here](https://github.com/waku-org/research/issues/23).

The simulation included 100 waku nodes running in parallel.

Proof generation times - 
![img](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8811422/268019958-c2392954-ea42-4c0e-ae25-0d2b965dc9bf.png)

Proof verification times -
![img](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8811422/267959342-e4481f2d-1e21-41e3-a693-f277594d8073.png)

A spammer node publishes 3000 msg/epoch, which is detected by all connected nodes, and subsequently disconnect to prevent further spam -
![img](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8811422/268024411-2af9e330-1e80-49fa-892d-ebcf0ede9d9c.png)

## Security analysis

- Barbulescu, R., & Duquesne, S. (2017). Updating key size estimations for pairings.

> Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2017/334. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00145-018-9280-5 concludes that that the `bn254` curve has only 100 bits of security.

Author: Addressed https://github.com/vacp2p/vac.dev/pull/132/commits/f5ee95ceca79c0ea24972ef41f36178064607421

Following is a demo provided by @rramos that demonstrates
[waku-rln-relay used in react native](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ITLYrDOQrHQX2_3Q6O5EqKPYJN8Ye2gF/view?usp=sharing).

> Warning: The react native sdk will be deprecated soon, and the above demo should serve as a PoC for RLN on mobiles

## RLN usage guide

[Zerokit](https://github.com/vacp2p/zerokit) implements api's that allow users to handle operations to the tree, as well as generate/verify RLN proofs.
It exports a rust api, as well as FFI api's to be used in other languages.

Following is a diagram that will help understand the dependency tree -

![rln-dep-tree](https://hackmd.io/_uploads/B1DgIbCin.jpg)

### Usage in Rust

- The [crate](https://crates.io/crates/rln) is well documented [here](https://docs.rs/rln/0.4.1/rln/public/struct.RLN.html). 

### Usage in other languages

- The FFI api is well documented [here](https://docs.rs/rln/0.4.1/rln/ffi/index.html)

### Waku RLN Relay usage guide

- Please refer to the [RLN Implementers guide](https://hackmd.io/7cBCMU5hS5OYv8PTaW2wAQ?view) which shows how to run waku-rln-relay in a step-by-step process.

> 

Author: Addressed in 6643b33

## Future work

- Optimizations to zerokit for proof generation time.
- Incrementing tree depth from 20 to 32, to allow more memberships.
- Optimizations to the smart contract.
- An ability to signal validity of a message in different time windows.
- Usage of proving systems other than Groth16.

> 

Reviewer: Can we add another bullet here like "Adding batch proofs"

Author: Sure, but may I ask about the research aspect of it? 
Can you explain the use-case of batching rln proofs?

Reviewer: Sorry, I think I have a misunderstanding. Momently, I thought that each user sent her request to a single machine and that machine created a proof one by one. Since each user proves her merkle inclusion proof, there is no need for batch proof right? We can skip this.
